Welcome back. Now we're going to start
with the 18th verse of the 27 practice
of body surface.
Okay. Although
Although immersed
in poverty and always disparaged
by others
plagued.
Oh, these are difficult. By serious
illness and torment by evil spirits
spirits taking on the suffering of
living beings without discouragement is
the practice of bodhicattvas.
Oh,
this verse describes a situation where
the bodhic sattvas have a lot of
difficult circumstances
such as um suffering, poverty,
um
discouragement
by others, social rejection,
serious illness
or torment. by evil spreads as bodhic
sattvas they must take those situations
onto the bodhic sa path and not let them
um diminish the power of their
bodhicetta mind.
So another thing it says here tormented
by evil spirits
e evil spirits can be um understood in a
in a in a in in a few different ways.
Okay.
It depends on the context and tradition
torture, you know. So here it symbolizes
inner staggers
such as fear, doubt,
anxiety, anger,
um jealousy, wrong views, illusions as
well as external obstacles such as
illness, uh physical suffering,
um poverty,
worldly desire,
laziness.
What else? Distractions
keep them from focusing on their
spiritual goals,
right? Um encounters with difficult
people who harm their practice and uh
and so on so forth.
Mahayana Buddhism
teachs that all these difficult
challenges whether external or internal
are again opportunities to uh generate
bodhicitta.
uh body satas face.
Um these difficulties with courage
and um transform them into opportunities
for their spiritual growth and they
would think that I am glad all of this
is happening to me not to anybody else.
They really think that
and this this this happened a lot in
Tibet and they really think that they
say like oh don't kill this person just
kill me. Um
so they will be able to bring these
challenges
onto bodhicatta path even in the face of
overwhelming difficulties.
The bodhic sattas remain unwavering in
their altruism, their commitment uh um
regardless of personal suffering or
external obstacles
whatever
that's why they are called bodhic satta
right do you know what what bodhic satta
mean like they possess an inner strength
bodhic satta a courageous actually they
Courageous courageous bodhic sattvas
courageous unweber in mind that's what
bodhic sat
and uh never ever discourag it.
So this verse
also mentions that
um
to be you know without discouragement is
the practice of bodhic sattva. It means
that um
that our
determination has to be strong. Um it's
because while we practice bodhicitta, we
may face all kinds of circumstances.
So we have to be we have to remember
um
every obstacle
encountered along the way uh becomes an
um opportunity to practice compassion
uh which is is an essential quality for
anyone on this path this uh this bodhisa
path.
So when we are facing difficulties
we need to remember dharma practice.
Uh if we feel um dharma practice is not
useful
that would be a sign of
discouragement
and disappointment.
If you view
dharma practice as
useless when it cannot solve your
problems, your obstacles,
that is an incorrect view. Okay. Uh we
can see all these great practitioners
uh went through such difficult lives
under different situations,
circumstances
but they never lost their strength
and never sort of become discouraged.
That's that's that's why bodhi sattva
right. So never change their mind
because then also they know how to
handle this all different kind of
situations. They have a wisdom.
Uh now the next 19th verse is
though you may be famous
and revert by many people
and gain wealth like a god of
Baharabana.
Realizing that worldly fortune has no
essence and being without arrogance is
the practice of bodhicattas.
This verse emphasizes um again
detachment
and wisdom
and the face of worldly success.
Worldly people think if we become a
wealthy enough
we will have power right and we will be
able to control everything
and I will tell others what to do.
This idea is is a big problem for
bodhicattas.
The bodhicattva path is about uh
transcending ego and selfcentered
desires.
So bodhic surfas recognize that
detachment allows you to focus on the
well-be of others. Bodhi surfas are not
against
100% right worldly success as long as
they are not harmful.
Being wealthy and famous can be very
very beneficial or can be very very
harmful.
The problem with worldly success is
it often leads to negative emotions such
as arrogance, selfishness, and
attachment.
So these
negative emotions will destroy your
spiritual practice.
That's why worldly success can be very
harmful if you are a spiritual
practitioner.
Uh for example,
um attachment
can create dissatisfaction
and anxiety.
Arrogance creates the habit of uh um how
is looking down on others
creates a
big separation between yourself and
others.
So rely on them for happiness can lead
to suffering. So this is why many
spiritual
um teachings
emphasize
uh finding inner peace rather than um
dependent on external worldly success.
If wealth and power are used
selfishly
they can cause harm to others.
If a wealthy and famous person remains a
humble,
generous,
compassionate, that can create positive
changes and can be very beneficial
my opinion. So it says gain wealth like
the god of vasharana
realizing that worldly fortune has no
essence.
uh it says this vashraana is
traditionally
known as the god of wealth
right therefore represents the richest
person in the universe
okay it's because vashana
for example owns a thousand times
everything that this whole world Yes.
Okay. Do you think that's the richest
person in the universe?
So it says it's just the example. I
don't know how much he owns
but supposedly you know they said we kne
oh his reach is like vashana
say that all the time.
Um
so it says even if you gain wealth like
him worldly worldly uh worldly fortune
has no essence. You know most people and
especially non nonpractitioners
think that um this concept that the
worldly success doesn't have any sense
doesn't make any sense. Right? That's
may be correct for temporary um reasons
especially for those people who don't
believe in any kind of uh spiritual
practice
that they only focus on worldly success.
That's all they care about and that's
all they want.
Um they would do anything for worldly
success, right? They don't care about um
the harm they cause. They don't believe
in cause and karma. They they they they
totally believe that their happiness is
about wealth and fame and they think
that's you know that um it's important
to have a strong attachment to this life
and um and worldly success and so on. So
if you are not spiritual practitioner
then of course worldly success is very
very important very very important we're
not talking here about that kind of
person right that's not our business not
our business but we're talking about
here is people who are spiritual
practitioners
so in Buddhism the key is not the wealth
or fame itself but the motivation ation
and action of individual.
So being being wealthy could be as I
said you know beneficial could be very
harmful for their practice. We're
talking about practitioners, not
thinking about the non Buddhist or
nonpractitioners. For them, of course,
it's important. That's why you know most
uh Buddhist do you know most genuine I
could say genuine spiritual
practitioners do not focus on wealth and
fame.
uh because you know attachment
to wealth and attachment to fame
has two problems right first when your
attachment increase
then it's difficult to leverate yourself
second when your attachment to wealth
and fame
your jealous will grow tremendously
jealous can make your mind
uh tighter and tighter. Jealous can even
even
turn your family and friends into your
enemies.
That's why it says recognizing that
worldly fortune has no essence
for dharma practitioners. Okay. It's
because first of all, worldly fortune is
impermanent, right? And second of all,
it is the main source of attachment and
dissatisfaction.
So when you have worldly fortune it's
difficult to develop your spiritual
practice such as renunciation
bodhicitta
renunciation of bodhicitta are the
foundation of hayana and mahayana
Buddhist practice
instead of worldly
wealth. Um
the true wealth the the Buddhism the
Mahayana teach wealth is bodhicitta.
So the richest so the richest people in
the world are bodhic sappas.
They have everything
let me tell you they have satisfaction.
They have compassion,
a kind heart, patient,
wisdom
and because of all these qualities they
have
they have they have space for all the
negative things we discussed above
and they can accept everything
both positive negative and They respond
only positively,
very kindly
because of their bodhicitta mind.
But for those who are not practitioners,
of course, worldly sex is important.
Don't misunderstand.
Now the next 20th verse, it says,
This is important.
If you have not tamed the enemy of your
own anger, the more you defeat the outer
enemies, the more they will increase.
class with the army of love and
compassion subduing your own mind is the
practice of bodhi satta
beautiful this I like this one
that means if we have not subdued in the
inner enemy of anger hajjet
then external enemies will only increase
teachers say you know uh if you kill if
you kill out of anger your enemies will
be never ending.
If you kill anger itself
that will kill your enemies forever.
Keep that in mind. So once we have
overcome anger
there are no further enemies in the
world outside
for you. If your anger diminishes then
there is no action done in anger.
So in Buddhism
whenever anger arises in your mind
it is seen as one of the most dangerous
emotions.
So it is necessary to recognize it as an
enemy
as something that can really harm you
and will cause problems with others and
lead to tremendous suffering.
So even if you win against others,
but unresolved anger will continue to
harm you and create more enemies in your
mind.
If you kill one enemy
to get rid of that person, right, then
more people of that person's side will
try to kill you back.
Therefore,
fighting with external enemies never
works.
So this verse encourages
focusing in in world
and taming your anger with the army of
loving kindness and compassion.
So the real enemy is only one thing that
is anger itself.
So we cannot allow it to exist in our
mind.
The antidote to that is
love and compassion.
When your heart
is placed with love and compassion,
there will not be enough room for anger.
Love and compassion cannot coexist with
anger
for sure.
And when you have
anger, hatred,
it's just like um
just like a sharp thorn in your feet and
you are the only
victim who suffers.
Anger itself is suffering and the one
who has anger will naturally generate
suffering.
Shannadea remember said that if you walk
on the ground and it's hurting your
feet, you might want to cover all the
ground with leather
so that you are protected from the
suffering of u prickly
ground.
He said, "Where would you find enough
leather to cover the entire surface of
the earth?"
But if you use leather just around your
feet, then it is if the whole ground has
been covered.
So that's very nice, right? So anger
will
first anger will make make you suffer
then anger you know gradually make the
people around
dislike you right if you are very angry
person nobody wants to be close to you
dangerous
so this verse suggests That
true strength comes from within.
When you get angry, the first step is
is awareness of the anger as it arise in
your mind and observe the anger
without judgment.
Just observe.
Even teachers say you know like even a
short pause can create a space between
uh the emotions and your reaction.
So when uh when you get angry sometimes
walk
or gentle movement
helps your emotion little bit calm down.
Sometimes
when you get angry, guidance from a
teacher or SA member
helps you navigate challenging emotions
and understand how anger harms you more
than others
causing
mental suffering and damage in your
relationship. ships.
But
we have always regarded the enemy as
something outside of ourselves.
But this verse says that is a total
mystery.
So if we do not subdue our anger, we
will continue to experience enemies.
It doesn't matter if this person makes
mistakes or not. We will still find a
reason to hate them. Simply it's because
there is the angry or the the the the
energy of anger inside us.
So this verse suggests that if you want
to stop having external enemies then you
should eliminate your um angry mind.
Then all external enemies
are eliminated.
In this way outer enemies should not be
a problem.
Even if they are there
they would not be able to harm you.
So this is the important way to control
our anger. Anger is big problem in human
being.
So the creator of
enemies is one's own anger mind. So
that's how bodhic sattas look at the
people who harm them. Oh, I can't can't
get angry.
So it's important. Now the next 21st
verse is
sensual pleasures are like salt water.
The more
you use them, the more
desires you are become. Thus, when
something gives rise to attachment,
giving it up immediately is the practice
of bodhic sattas.
This verse deals with uh
with t attachment, right?
The comparison of u sensor pleasures to
salt salt water
suggests that attachment to them doesn't
lead to satisfaction
just as drinking salt water makes you
more thirsty.
They said that. Is that true? I never
drink salty water.
The more you drink,
the more you drink makes you more
thirsty. Is that true?
Oh, see you're science. You know, you
know that.
Okay, then this makes sense.
So, drinking salt water makes you more
thirsty.
So pursuing sensual pleasures increase
um craving rather than satisfaction.
That's what it means. So if we allow
ourselves to give uh and to uh craving,
we will never have enough. Never have
enough. We will never be happy. That
means we never have enough. That means
we'll never uh never be happy.
So generally speaking, everyone
everyone has a different um different
tendency to what they're attached to.
Some people like to some people like to,
you know, like um eat good food but may
not care some so much about clothing.
Some people like to wear high quality
clothing
but may not care so much about food.
So therefore the food itself does not
possess the nature of good taste. You
know the tastiness of food depends on
individual's habit and and desire.
For example, people like people like to
eat meat out of their desire for
delicious food
not because they're hungry
but only to satisfies their desire for
the taste of meat
but eating meat causes many animals to
be slaughtered.
So therefore this verse suggests we
should not be attached to things like
food or clothing. If we do not have
attachment to them
then any food
any clothing will be good.
So there are two ways of get rid of
um
um sense object.
One is literally
to give them up, right?
The other is to abandon attachment to
them. Which one you want?
For example, I give you example.
Malaria, right? Malarip you know
malaria. Malaripa
give up all sense pleasures to meditate
in solitude.
and his teacher Marba right Marba took
sense pleasures onto the path
using them as a practice
Marba married has a wife he has a son
has a um lots of gold you know all that
Marba was Malariba's root teacher
so Malaria give up everything okay
nothing. He owns nothing. Marva owns
everything but he knows how to take them
onto the path which means Marba
give up attachment
even though he has all these things
Miller give up all things then
he doesn't have any attachment to them
that's two things right so if we cannot
do both of this
then We should live a simple life with
satisfaction.
That's what I try to do
cuz this both I can do both cannot do
both of these mara and
but I can just have a simple life
with satisfaction. So it says um when
something give rise to attachment giving
up it immediately right it says in this
verse it doesn't mean giving up food or
clothes but give up touchment to them
basically find a find contentment within
because a because a content mind
provides um peace.
So here give up means means giving up
desire and attachment because um in the
long run those are harmful.
This doesn't mean that we have to make a
make a huge changes immediately.
Um it may be easier to start with small
changes and gradually sort of increase.
By doing so we will know
through our own experience
that simplicity brings more peace of
mind satisfaction.
As I said, you know, there is nothing
wrong with gathering wealth as long as
we are able to transform them into
uh conditions for spiritual development.
But it it it it often doesn't happen
that way.
That's why bodhic sattas live very
simple life
and that is also practice of
renunciation.
Renunciation is to um to um appreciate
what we have,
to enjoy
without claiming
and to realize that this precious human
life is is capable of achieving
enlightenment
and to understand
um samsic happiness has the nature of
suffering.
That's that's a renunciation mind the
practice that's why the path is um all
about how to how to gain ultimate
happiness.
I think the problem is we don't
understand
uh and
don't see samsara is the cause of
suffering.
If we see it make us suffering,
then we will do something
and get rid of suffering.
Like you know when when you are thirsty,
you're looking for water.
You're not going to give up until you
find the water.
So if you see attachment to samsaric
pleasures
develop suffering then you really want
to escape it.
Just like a thirsty person looks
urgently for um water, right? That's the
beginning of that's the beginning of
renunciation and and ultimately
bodhicitta.
But the problem is people trying to so
hard
changing you know jobs and relationships
and um thinking you know this time it
will bring peace and happiness and um
but
no matter how much they rearrange their
situation the game is still samsara
It's like someone It's like someone
stuck in a burn house
who keeps moving
furnitureures around to get more
comfortable
instead of realizing they need to get
out. Right?
But we are just within samsara. We try
to change these things in here and
there. Oh, this time this will make
better, make me more happier. But just
the the we are in this samsara in we are
the your house is burn
right. But you think like inside inside
the house you you go different places.
Okay, maybe this will be better.
Just basically your house is burning
doesn't matter inside whatever you're
doing.
So we don't understand that the samsara.
So this verse says that you should view
all samsaric pleasure as indulging in
drinking salty water.
See you should find real water when you
are thirsty not salty water.
When pleasures give rise to attachment,
they bind your mind
and creating strong desire on external
conditions for happiness.
So the solution to
this attachment
is the
the instruction give up it immediately.
M say
um give up it immediately. Uh it's not
about rejecting all pleasure but about
understanding that
the nature of pleasure can lead to more
suffering.
Okay.
Now this completes the section of the
text um dealing with uh
training in relative bodhic.
There were two sections right. First
there was the explanation of the main
meditation practice of bodhic ja
practice of uh exchanging ourselves for
others.
And then the second there were uh 10
verses dealing with uh uh the the
postmeditation practice and how we
should work with the various situations.
So the basic instruction in those 10
verses was how to deal with
circumstances
that create disturbing emotions
and
um the importance of maintaining
bodhicitta
love and kindness and compassion and
practice and patient and post
meditation.
So that's the summary of all those
verses. Okay. So here we finished
relative bodhicitta meditation
and the next verses are about ultimate
bodhicitta meditation. Okay. So I'm
going to stop here. We're going to
recite the
second chapter here and and